OEP-52 (DRAFT): docs:  add OEP for event bus (#233)
openedx/open-edx-proposals: oeps/architectural-decisions/oep-0052-arch-event-bus-technology.rst

==============================
OEP-0052: Event Bus Technology
==============================

.. This OEP template is based on Nygard's Architecture Decision Records.

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 75

   * - OEP-52
     - :doc:`OEP-0052 <oep-0052-arch-event-bus-technology>`
   * - Title
     - Event Bus Technology
   * - Last Modified
     - 2021-08-26
   * - Authors
     - Feanil Patel <feanil@edx.org>, Robert Raposa <rraposa@edx.org>
   * - Arbiter
     - TBD
   * - Status
     - Draft
   * - Type
     - Architecture
   * - Created
     - 2021-08-16
   * - Review Period
     - TBD

Overview
--------

* Adding an event bus to the Open edX platform allows asynchronous event messaging across services, which enables a number of improvements aligned with our architectural goals.

> * We are trialing Kafka to implement an Open edX event bus. This decision will be updated as we commit or change direction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We are trialing Pulsar (and Kafka) to implement an Open edX event bus. This decision will be updated as we commit or change direction.
```

.. _Architecture Manifesto: https://openedx.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/AC/pages/1074397222/Architecture+Manifesto+WIP
.. _Reactive Manifesto: https://www.reactivemanifesto.org/
.. _Message Driven (in contrast to Event-Driven): https://www.reactivemanifesto.org/glossary#Message-Driven

Decision
--------

The Open edX platform will benefit from having a message bus. We believe `Apache Pulsar`_ is a good choice for the event bus after building an initial POC in both `Kafka`_ and `Pulsar`_.  Based on the findings of the POC we will begin trialing `Pulsar`_ to solve some specific platform problems addressed by the `publish-subscribe messaging pattern`_.

.. _Apache Pulsar: https://pulsar.apache.org/
.. _Pulsar: https://pulsar.apache.org/
.. _Kafka: https://kafka.apache.org/
.. _publish-subscribe messaging pattern: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publish%E2%80%93subscribe_pattern

Why (trial) Pulsar?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Pulsar and Kafka were both in very close running in our initial assessment.  In writing code to work with kafka and examanining its client interface, we saw the lack of a synchronous interface for writing data to be problemating.  It meant we would have to write more complex code in order to gauranteed that messages were persisted and make use of callbacks to respond to errors.  Pulsar on the other hand provides both an async and synchronous message sending interface.  The synchronous interface makes it a lot easier to write code when you need to ensure that database comitting and message sending happen atomically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pulsar and Kafka were both in very close running in our initial assessment.  In writing code to work with Kafka and examining its client interface, we saw the lack of a synchronous interface for writing data to be problematic.  It meant we would have to write more complex code in order to guarantee that messages were persisted and make use of callbacks to respond to errors.  Pulsar on the other hand provides both an async and synchronous message sending interface.  The synchronous interface makes it a lot easier to write code when you need to ensure that database committing and message sending happen atomically.
```

> In trialing Kafka we saw that some of our initial assumptions about the ease of operating Kafka in AWS due to the availablity of MSK(Managed Streamking Kafka) were not as adventageous as we expected.  While MSK solves the issue of deploying the broker, Kafka has enough add-ons(schema mangement, partition-management tool) that we don't actually reduce operational burden by having Kafka as a managed service compared to Pulsar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In trialing Kafka we saw that some of our initial assumptions about the ease of operating Kafka in AWS due to the availability of MSK (Managed Streaming Kafka) were not as advantageous as we expected.  While MSK solves the issue of deploying the broker, Kafka has enough add-ons (schema management, partition-management tool) that we don't actually reduce operational burden by having Kafka as a managed service compared to Pulsar.
```

* Education will be required for both developers and operators regarding best practices for each role.
* Code to interact with Kafka and its libraries will be added to core services.
* At least one initial use case must be completed. One potential candidate is the grade change event in the LMS, and its use by the Credentials service.
* Once we have a message bus, we can investigate other potential use cases:

  * Course/program update propagation.
  * Feed into xAPI/Caliper capabilities.
  * New services and features can be built fully de-coupled from the core application.

Rejected Alternatives
---------------------

Apache Pulsar
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Although rejected to start, `Apache Pulsar`_ remains an option if solving with Kafka turns out to be overly burdensome for developers or operators.

Pros
^^^^

* Ease of scalability (built-in, according to docs).
* Ease of data retention capabilities.
* Additional built-in pub/sub features (built-in, according to docs).
* 

Cons
^^^^

* Requires 3rd party hosting or larger upfront investment if self-hosted (kubernetes).
* Less mature (but growing) community, little documentation, and few answers.

> * Python built-in schema management is hard to work with for complex use cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Python built-in schema management is buggy and hard to work with for complex use cases.
```
